# Setting up the environment

To create games with M you will need at least one game engine and an interface
of M.

## Selecting a game engine

M supports the [Unity] game engine, but thanks to its adaptable nature, support
for the [Unreal] and [Godot] game engines will be possible in the future.

You need a Unity version 2019.3+, preferably 2019.4. You can find the installer
for free [here].

## Selecting an interface

M projects can be developed using many interfaces. The cool part is that all
those interfaces can be seamlessly combined to create a coherent project.

The interfaces can be subdivided in three main groups: Textual visual and
project interfaces.

* **Textual interfaces**

  M offers the developers the ability to write programs in different languages.
  Currently only English and Spanish are supported but adding more is a
  relatively cheap feature that is to be expected in the future. It supports all
  Unicode characters like ☀ and ☠.

* **Visual interfaces**

  You can develop and visualize M projects using the block based [online visual
  editor].

* **Project interfaces**

  Currently only Hybrid Unity is support. Support for Pure Unity, Unreal engine
  and Godot might come in the future.

{% hint style="working" %} When you modify a file using any interface, the rest
will be updated upon saving any file. {% endhint %}

## Structure of a project

Typical workflow. A project of M consist of several folders. Each folder
contains the representation of the game in a certain format. In order to control
what information goes where use Special names or special files.

[online visual editor]: https://martin-azpillaga.github.io/M/
