# Your first game

M abstracts the idea of a game. In M, every game is described by a set of
entities and a set of systems. Entities hold all the data and systems declare
the code to interact with that data.

Shoot them up. We will use an iterative approach were we keep adding features
one by one. A feature includes data and interaction, so we must edit the
entities and systems that exist in the world to add a new feature.

But first, let's extract all the features ww desire in the core game loop of our
game.

## Feature extraction

* Render the character and hazards.
* Control the character with some form of input.
* Create additional hazards over time.
* Move hazards.
* Destroy the character when a hazard hits it.
* Clear the hazards when they leave the screen.
* Shoot projectiles.
* Destroy hazards using projectiles.

Note that the words used are consciously vague, as no art direction is involved
for now. The character could be a car, a spaceship, a superhero or a dolphin.
The hazards could be asteroids, tanks or chickens, etc.

## Rendering the character

The rendering is done implicitly. Every entity that has some visual data is
supposed to be rendered - if it is in the view of the camera -. So all we need
to do is to provide visual data to the entities we want to render. We will use
3D art for this game. So every visual element will need a mesh and a material.

~~~ text
"character" { position 0 0 0, mesh "spaceship", material "shiny" }
~~~

Similarly for the hazards:

~~~ text
"hazard" { mesh "asteroid", material "rock" }
~~~

Now don't expect the engine to generate the specified art for you. Maybe in
future versions it will find and download certain public domain assets, but for
now, it will generate some placeholder meshes and materials that artists can
replace with their creations.

## Controlling the character

~~~ text
control
{
    foreach a
    {
        a.velocity = a.motionVector * a.speed
    }
}
~~~

## Shooting projectiles

~~~ text
    shoot:
    for all entity a with gunTriggered
    {
        projectile = create(a.projectile)
        projectile.position = a.position + a.gunOffset
    }
~~~

~~~ text
    projectile { position 0 0 0, mesh bullet, material deadly, velocity 0 10 0 }
~~~

~~~ text
    character { velocity 0 0, motion gamepad left stick, speed 5 }
~~~

## Move hazards

Hazards will be moved by the physics, all we need to do is to add mass

~~~ text
    hazard { mass 1 }
~~~

## Create hazards over time

~~~ text
    createHazards:
    for all entity a with spawnRateTimeout
    {
        spawned = create(a.spawn)
        spawned.position = join(random(a.positionRangeX),random(a.positionRangeY))
    }
~~~

~~~ text
    spawner { spawn hazard, positionRangeX -50 50, positionRangeY 50 60 }
~~~

## Destroy hazards with bullets

~~~ text
    destroy:
    for all entity a with enterCollision
    {
        if has(a.first, forceDestruction)
        {
            destroy(a.second)
            destroy(a.first)
        }
    }
~~~

~~~ text
    projectile { radius 0.5, forceDestruction }

~~~ text
    hazard { extent 1 1 1, forceDestruction }
~~~

## Reset when character dies

~~~ text
    die:
    for all entity a
    {
        for all entity b with essentialCharacter
        {
            count += a.worth
        }
        if count = a.restartAmount
        {
            for all entity c
            {
                destroy(c)
            }
            create(a.scene)
        }
    }
~~~
