# Setting up the environment

The easiest way to start developing in M is to download the oficial code editor.
Download the [linux] or [windows] version. It includes the documentation and the
visual coding widget.

## Dependencies

The M language server requires Java >= 8 set up in your path.
To know your version of java run the command

~~~ shell
java -version
~~~

and check that the printed version is higher than 8.
If the version is lower or the java command is not found, you will need to
[download Java] and add it to the path.

## Installing the Visual Studio Code extenion

M supports the [Unity] game engine, but thanks to its adaptable nature, support
for the [Unreal] and [Godot] game engines will be possible in the future.

You need a Unity version 2019.3+, preferably 2019.4. You can find the installer
for free [here].

## Downloading the custom editor

Head to the [latest release] and
download the program for your operating system.

If you are on Windows, you can execute m.exe directly.
If you are on Linux, you might need to make it executable first:

~~~ shell
chmod +x /path/to/m.AppImage
~~~

If you are on Mac, open m.dmg and
drag the application to the applications folder.

## All set up

Regardless you are using Visual Studio Code or the
M editor,
you are ready to [create your first project]!

[download Java]: https://jdk.java.net/14/
[latest release]: https://github.com/martin-azpillaga/M/releases/latest
[create your first project]: 1.%20Your%20first%20project.md
