# Your first game

M abstracts the idea of a game. In M, every game is a set of entities and a set
of systems. Entities hold all the data and systems declare the code to interact
with that data.

Shoot them up. We will use an iterative approach were we keep adding features
one by one. A feature includes data and interaction, so we must edit the
entities and systems that exist in the world to add a new feature.

But first, let's extract all the features ww desire in the core game loop of our
game.

## Build configurations

Users can configure the builds writing a m.project file. Is a json file with two
fields: Sources and targets. Sources is an array of glob patterns specifying all
the files the compiler will compile, including files in different languages.
Targets is an array of target objects. A target object has two fields: Kind and
path. Kind specifies the kind of transformation. For example, Unity, Blockly or
M. Path represents the folder where the output will be.

## Feature extraction

* Render the character and hazards.
* Control the character with some form of input.
* Create hazards over time.
* Move hazards.
* Destroy the character when a hazard hits it.
* Clear the hazards when they leave the screen.
* Shoot projectiles.
* Destroy hazards using projectiles.

Note that the words used are consciously vague, as the game won't have any art
direction for now. The character could be a car, a spaceship, a superhero or a
dolphin. The hazards could be asteroids, tanks or chickens, etc.

## Rendering the character

The engine makes the rendering implicitly. It renders every entity that has some
visual data and it's in the view of the camera. All we need to do is to provide
visual data to the entities we want to render. We will use 3D art for this game.
Every visual element will need a mesh and a material.

~~~ {.set .first .main.text}
"character" { position 0 1 0, mesh "spaceship", material "shiny" }
~~~

Similarly for the hazards:

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
"hazard" { mesh "asteroid", material "rock" }
~~~

Now don't expect the engine to generate the specified art for you. In future
versions it will find and download certain public domain assets, but for now, it
will generate some placeholder meshes and materials that artists can replace
with their creations.

## Controlling the character

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
control
{
    foreach a
    {
        a.velocity = a.motionVector * a.speed
    }
}
~~~

## Shooting projectiles

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
shoot:
for all entity a with gunTriggered
{
    projectile = create(a.projectile)
    projectile.position = a.position + a.gunOffset
}
~~~

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
projectile { position 0 1 0, mesh bullet, material evil, velocity 0 10 0 }
~~~

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
character { velocity 0 0, motion gamepad left stick, speed 5 }
~~~

## Move hazards

The physics control how hazards move, all we need to do is to add mass

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
hazard { mass 1 }
~~~

## Create hazards over time

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
createHazards:
for all entity a with spawnRateTimeout
{
    spawned = create(a.spawn)
    spawned.position = join(random(a.positionRangeX),random(a.positionRangeY))
}
~~~

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
spawner { spawn hazard, positionRangeX -50 50, positionRangeY 50 60 }
~~~

## Destroy hazards with bullets

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
destroy:
for all entity a with enterCollision
{
    if has(a.first, forceDestruction)
    {
        destroy(a.second)
        destroy(a.first)
    }
}
~~~

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
projectile { radius 0.5, forceDestruction }
~~~

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
hazard { extent 1 2 1, forceDestruction }
~~~

## Reset when character dies

~~~ {.append .first .main.text}
die:
for all entity a
{
    for all entity b with essentialCharacter
    {
        count += a.worth
    }
    if count = a.restartAmount
    {
        for all entity c
        {
            destroy(c)
        }
        create(a.scene)
    }
}
~~~
