# Classification. What is M technically

M is a Imperative Structured programming Procedural programming Modular
programming Data oriented programming DSL Compiled External C-like concrete
syntax textual Scratch like visual syntax Abstract syntax is a EMF model
Strongly typed with implicit types Type inferred and validated No null
reference, no type conversion error, no infinite loop Execution semantics: Game
engine projects with assets Useful for non programmers Turing complete Efficient
compilation Efficient generated code, native multi threaded Clean: Native
support for DOD Full IDE support:

- Code completion
- Code generation
- Syntax Highlight
- Error markers
- Quick fixes
- Formatting
- Refactoring
- Labels
- Outline view
- Find uses
- Find definition
- Debugging

Small syntax Concise User defined abstractions: Files as libraries, functions
for reusability, prefabs possibly nested Fast and volatile development of
language No collections, all entities Big language scope: Most games M improves:

- Productivity: Less code to write and read
- Quality: No runtime errors, halts, multi threaded
- Communication and thinking: Familiar domain concepts, different interfaces
- Platform support: Any platform with JVM any platform with Unity support

## Turing complete

M is turing complete. Indeed, given a Turing machine with a table of rules, one
can simulate it in M as follows:

The tape is a list of entities, each having previous, next and value. Previous
and next refer to the previous and next entity cells and value stores the value
of the cell.

Create an entity global with state, haltState and initialCell. State determines
the internal state of the Turing machine and the haltState is the state where
the computation stops. Place the head of the machine in the entity referenced by
initialCell.

Create an entity entry with components state, value, writeState, writeValue,
continueRight. The combination of state and value determine when to use this
instruction. In that case, replace the global state with writeState, replace the
cell value with writeValue and proceed right if continueRight else proceed left.

The algorithm follows by storing the currentCell in a variable of type Entity:

~~~ m
currentCell = global.initialCell

while global.state != global.haltState
{
    for each a with a = currentCell
    {
        for each entry
        {
            if global.state = entry.state and a.value = entry.value
            {
                a.value = entry.writeValue
                global.state = entry.writeState

                if (entry.continueRight)
                {
                    currentCell = a.next
                }
                else
                {
                    currentCell = a.previous
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
~~~
